I
O you know what it is to be poor? Not poor with the arrogant poverty complained
of by certain people who have five or six thousand a year to live upon, and who
yet swear they can hardly manage to make both ends meet, but really poor,—
downright, cruelly, hideously poor, with a poverty that is graceless, sordid and
miserable? Poverty that compels you to dress in your one suit of clothes till it is worn
threadbare,—that denies you clean linen on account of the ruinous charges of
washerwomen,—that robs you of your own self-respect, and causes you to slink along
the streets vaguely abashed, instead of walking erect among your fellow-men in
independent ease,—this is the sort of poverty I mean. This is the grinding curse that
keeps down noble aspiration under a load of ignoble care; this is the moral cancer that
eats into the heart of an otherwise well-intentioned human creature and makes him
envious and malignant, and inclined to the use of dynamite. When he sees the fat idle
woman of society passing by in her luxurious carriage, lolling back lazily, her face
mottled with the purple and red signs of superfluous eating,—when he observes the
brainless and sensual man of fashion smoking and dawdling away the hours in the
Park, as if all the world and its millions of honest hard workers were created solely for
the casual diversion of the so-called ‘upper’ classes,—then the good blood in him turns
to gall, and his suffering spirit rises in fierce rebellion, crying out—“Why in God’s
name, should this injustice be? Why should a worthless lounger have his pockets full
of gold by mere chance and heritage, while I, toiling wearily from morn till midnight,
can scarce afford myself a satisfying meal?”
Why indeed! Why should the wicked flourish like a green bay-tree? I have often
thought about it. Now however I believe I could help to solve the problem out of my
own personal experience. But ... such an experience! Who will credit it? Who will
believe that anything so strange and terrific ever chanced to the lot of a mortal man?
No one. Yet it is true;—truer than much so-called truth. Moreover I know that many
men are living through many such incidents as have occurred to me, under precisely
the same influence, conscious perhaps at times, that they are in the tangles of sin, but
too weak of will to break the net in which they have become voluntarily imprisoned.
Will they be taught, I wonder, the lesson I have learned? In the same bitter school,
under the same formidable taskmaster? Will they realize as I have been forced to do,—
aye, to the very fibres of my intellectual perception,—the vast, individual, active Mind,
which behind all matter, works unceasingly, though silently, a very eternal and positive
God? If so, then dark problems will become clear to them, and what seems injustice in
the world will prove pure equity! But I do not write with any hope of either persuading
or enlightening my fellow-men. I know their obstinacy too well;—I can gauge it by my
own. My proud belief in myself was, at one time, not to be outdone by any human unit
on the face of the globe. And I am aware that others are in similar case. I merely intend
to relate the various incidents of my career in due order exactly as they happened,—
leaving to more confident heads the business of propounding and answering the riddles
of human existence as best they may.
During a certain bitter winter, long remembered for its arctic severity, when a
great wave of intense cold spread freezing influences not alone over the happy isles of
Britain, but throughout all Europe, I, Geoffrey Tempest, was alone in London and well-
nigh starving. Now a starving man seldom gets the sympathy he merits,—so few can
be persuaded to believe in him. Worthy folks who have just fed to repletion are the
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 4/257 most incredulous, some of them being even moved to smile when told of existing
hungry people, much as if these were occasional jests invented for after-dinner
amusement. Or, with that irritating vagueness of attention which characterizes
fashionable folk to such an extent that when asking a question they neither wait for the
answer nor understand it when given, the well-dined groups, hearing of some one
starved to death, will idly murmur ‘How dreadful!’ and at once turn to the discussion
of the latest ‘fad’ for killing time, ere it takes to killing them with sheer ennui. The
pronounced fact of being hungry sounds coarse and common, and is not a topic for
polite society, which always eats more than sufficient for its needs. At the period I am
speaking of however, I, who have since been one of the most envied of men, knew the
cruel meaning of the word hunger, too well,—the gnawing pain, the sick faintness, the
deadly stupor, the insatiable animal craving for mere food, all of which sensations are
frightful enough to those who are, unhappily, daily inured to them, but which when
they afflict one who has been tenderly reared and brought up to consider himself a
‘gentleman,’—God save the mark! are perhaps still more painful to bear. And I felt that
I had not deserved to suffer the wretchedness in which I found myself. I had worked
hard. From the time my father died, leaving me to discover that every penny of the
fortune I imagined he possessed was due to swarming creditors, and that nothing of all
our house and estate was left to me except a jewelled miniature of my mother who had
lost her own life in giving me birth,—from that time I say, I had put my shoulder to the
wheel and toiled late and early. I had turned my University education to the only use
for which it or I seemed fitted,—literature. I had sought for employment on almost
every journal in London,—refused by many, taken on trial by some, but getting steady
pay from none. Whoever seeks to live by brain and pen alone is, at the beginning of
such a career, treated as a sort of social pariah. Nobody wants him,—everybody
despises him. His efforts are derided, his manuscripts are flung back to him unread,
and he is less cared for than the condemned murderer in gaol. The murderer is at least
fed and clothed,—a worthy clergyman visits him, and his gaoler will occasionally
condescend to play cards with him. But a man gifted with original thoughts and the
power of expressing them, appears to be regarded by everyone in authority as much
worse than the worst criminal, and all the ‘jacks-in-office’ unite to kick him to death if
they can. I took both kicks and blows in sullen silence and lived on,—not for the love
of life, but simply because I scorned the cowardice of self-destruction. I was young
enough not to part with hope too easily;—the vague idea I had that my turn would
come,—that the ever-circling wheel of Fortune would perchance lift me up some day
as it now crushed me down, kept me just wearily capable of continuing existence,—
though it was merely a continuance and no more. For about six months I got some
reviewing work on a well-known literary journal. Thirty novels a week were sent to me
to ‘criticise,’—I made a habit of glancing hastily at about eight or ten of them, and
writing one column of rattling abuse concerning these thus casually selected,—the
remainder were never noticed at all. I found that this mode of action was considered
‘smart,’ and I managed for a time to please my editor who paid me the munificent sum
of fifteen shillings for my weekly labour. But on one fatal occasion I happened to
change my tactics and warmly praised a work which my own conscience told me was
both original and excellent. The author of it happened to be an old enemy of the
proprietor of the journal on which I was employed;—my eulogistic review of the hated
individual, unfortunately for me, appeared, with the result that private spite outweighed
public justice, and I was immediately dismissed.
After this I dragged on in a sufficiently miserable way, doing ‘hack work’ for the
dailies, and living on promises that never became realities, till, as I have said, in the
early January of the bitter winter alluded to, I found myself literally penniless and face
to face with starvation, owing a month’s rent besides for the poor lodging I occupied in
a back street not far from the British Museum. I had been out all day trudging from one
newspaper office to another, seeking for work and finding none. Every available post
was filled. I had also tried, unsuccessfully, to dispose of a manuscript of my own,—a
work of fiction which I knew had some merit, but which all the ‘readers’ in the
publishing offices appeared to find exceptionally worthless. These ‘readers’ I learned,
were most of them novelists themselves, who read other people’s productions in their
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 5/257 spare moments and passed judgment on them. I have always failed to see the justice of
this arrangement; to me it seems merely the way to foster mediocrities and suppress
originality. Common sense points out the fact that the novelist ‘reader’ who has a place
to maintain for himself in literature would naturally rather encourage work that is
likely to prove ephemeral, than that which might possibly take a higher footing than
his own. Be this as it may, and however good or bad the system, it was entirely
prejudicial to me and my literary offspring. The last publisher I tried was a kindly man
who looked at my shabby clothes and gaunt face with some commiseration.
“I’m sorry,” said he, “very sorry, but my readers are quite unanimous. From what
I can learn, it seems to me you have been too earnest. And also, rather sarcastic in
certain strictures against society. My dear fellow, that won’t do. Never blame society,
—it buys books! Now if you could write a smart love-story, slightly risqué,—even a
little more than risqué for that matter; that is the sort of thing that suits the present
age.”
“Pardon me,” I interposed somewhat wearily—“but are you sure you judge the
public taste correctly?”
He smiled a bland smile of indulgent amusement at what he no doubt considered
my ignorance in putting such a query. “Of course I am sure,”—he replied—“It is my
business to know the public taste as thoroughly as I know my own pocket. Understand
me,—I don’t suggest that you should write a book on any positively indecent subject,
—that can be safely left to the ‘New’ woman,”—and he laughed,—“but I assure you
high-class fiction doesn’t sell. The critics don’t like it, to begin with. What goes down
with them and with the public is a bit of sensational realism told in terse newspaper
English. Literary English,—Addisonian English,—is a mistake.”
“And I am also a mistake I think,” I said with a forced smile—“At any rate if
what you say be true, I must lay down the pen and try another trade. I am old-
fashioned enough to consider Literature as the highest of all professions, and I would
rather not join in with those who voluntarily degrade it.”
He gave me a quick side-glance of mingled incredulity and depreciation.
“Well, well!” he finally observed—“you are a little quixotic. That will wear off.
Will you come on to my club and dine with me?”
I refused this invitation promptly. I knew the man saw and recognised my
wretched plight,—and pride—false pride if you will—rose up to my rescue. I bade him
a hurried good-day, and started back to my lodging, carrying my rejected manuscript
with me. Arrived there, my landlady met me as I was about to ascend the stairs, and
asked me whether I would ‘kindly settle accounts’ the next day. She spoke civilly
enough, poor soul, and not without a certain compassionate hesitation in her manner.
Her evident pity for me galled my spirit as much as the publisher’s offer of a dinner
had wounded my pride,—and with a perfectly audacious air of certainty I at once
promised her the money at the time she herself appointed, though I had not the least
idea where or how I should get the required sum. Once past her, and shut in my own
room, I flung my useless manuscript on the floor and myself into a chair, and—swore.
It refreshed me to swear, and it seemed natural,—for though temporarily weakened by
lack of food, I was not yet so weak as to shed tears,—and a fierce formidable oath was
to me the same sort of physical relief which I imagine a fit of weeping may be to an
excitable woman. Just as I could not shed tears, so was I incapable of apostrophizing
God in my despair. To speak frankly, I did not believe in any God—then. I was to
myself an all-sufficing mortal, scorning the time-worn superstitions of so-called
religion. Of course I had been brought up in the Christian faith; but that creed had
become worse than useless to me since I had intellectually realized the utter
inefficiency of Christian ministers to deal with difficult life-problems. Spiritually I was
adrift in chaos,—mentally I was hindered both in thought and achievement,—bodily, I
was reduced to want. My case was desperate,—I myself was desperate. It was a
moment when if ever good and evil angels play a game of chance for a man’s soul,
they were surely throwing the dice on the last wager for mine. And yet, with it all, I felt
I had done my best. I was driven into a corner by my fellow-men who grudged me
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 6/257 space to live in, but I had fought against it. I had worked honestly and patiently;—all to
no purpose. I knew of rogues who gained plenty of money; and of knaves who were
amassing large fortunes. Their prosperity appeared to prove that honesty after all was
not the best policy. What should I do then? How should I begin the jesuitical business
of committing evil that good, personal good, might come of it? So I thought, dully, if
such stray half-stupefied fancies as I was capable of, deserved the name of thought.
The night was bitter cold. My hands were numbed, and I tried to warm them at the
oil-lamp my landlady was good enough to still allow me the use of, in spite of delayed
cash-payments. As I did so, I noticed three letters on the table,—one in a long blue
envelope suggestive of either a summons or a returned manuscript,—one bearing the
Melbourne postmark, and the third a thick square missive coroneted in red and gold at
the back. I turned over all three indifferently, and selecting the one from Australia,
balanced it in my hand a moment before opening it. I knew from whom it came, and
idly wondered what news it brought me. Some months previously I had written a
detailed account of my increasing debts and difficulties to an old college chum, who
finding England too narrow for his ambition had gone out to the wider New world on a
speculative quest of gold mining. He was getting on well, so I understood, and had
secured a fairly substantial position; and I had therefore ventured to ask him point-
blank for the loan of fifty pounds. Here, no doubt, was his reply, and I hesitated before
breaking the seal.
“Of course it will be a refusal,” I said half-aloud,—“However kindly a friend may
otherwise be, he soon turns crusty if asked to lend money. He will express many
regrets, accuse trade and the general bad times and hope I will soon ‘tide over.’ I know
the sort of thing. Well,—after all, why should I expect him to be different to other
men? I’ve no claim on him beyond the memory of a few sentimental arm-in-arm days
at Oxford.”
A sigh escaped me in spite of myself, and a mist blurred my sight for the moment.
Again I saw the grey towers of peaceful Magdalen, and the fair green trees shading the
walks in and around the dear old University town where we,—I and the man whose
letter I now held in my hand,—strolled about together as happy youths, fancying that
we were young geniuses born to regenerate the world. We were both fond of classics,
—we were brimful of Homer and the thoughts and maxims of all the immortal Greeks
and Latins,—and I verily believe, in those imaginative days, we thought we had in us
such stuff as heroes are made of. But our entrance into the social arena soon robbed us
of our sublime conceit,—we were common working units, no more,—the grind and
prose of daily life put Homer into the background, and we soon discovered that society
was more interested in the latest unsavoury scandal than in the tragedies of Sophocles
or the wisdom of Plato. Well! it was no doubt extremely foolish of us to dream that we
might help to regenerate a world in which both Plato and Christ appear to have failed,
—yet the most hardened cynic will scarcely deny that it is pleasant to look back to the
days of his youth if he can think that at least then, if only once in his life, he had noble
impulses.
The lamp burned badly, and I had to re-trim it before I could settle down to read
my friend’s letter. Next door some-one was playing a violin, and playing it well.
Tenderly and yet with a certain amount of brio the notes came dancing from the bow,
and I listened, vaguely pleased. Being faint with hunger I was somewhat in a listless
state bordering on stupor,—and the penetrating sweetness of the music appealing to the
sensuous and æsthetic part of me, drowned for the moment mere animal craving.
“There you go!” I murmured, apostrophizing the unseen musician,—“practising
away on that friendly fiddle of yours,—no doubt for a mere pittance which barely
keeps you alive. Possibly you are some poor wretch in a cheap orchestra,—or you
might even be a street-player and be able to live in this neighbourhood of the élite
starving,—you can have no hope whatever of being the ‘fashion’ and making your bow
before Royalty,—or if you have that hope, it is wildly misplaced. Play on, my friend,
play on!—the sounds you make are very agreeable, and seem to imply that you are
happy. I wonder if you are?—or if, like me, you are going rapidly to the devil!”
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 7/257 The music grew softer and more plaintive, and was now accompanied by the rattle
of hailstones against the window-panes. A gusty wind whistled under the door and
roared down the chimney,—a wind cold as the grasp of death and searching as a
probing knife. I shivered,—and bending close over the smoky lamp, prepared to read
my Australian news. As I opened the envelope, a bill for fifty pounds, payable to me at
a well-known London banker’s, fell out upon the table. My heart gave a quick bound
of mingled relief and gratitude.
“Why Jack, old fellow, I wronged you!” I exclaimed,—“Your heart is in the right
place after all.”
And profoundly touched by my friend’s ready generosity, I eagerly perused his
letter. It was not very long, and had evidently been written off in haste.
Dear Geoff,
I’m sorry to hear you are down on your luck; it shows what a crop
of fools are still flourishing in London, when a man of your capability cannot gain his
proper place in the world of letters, and be fittingly acknowledged. I believe it’s all a
question of wire-pulling, and money is the only thing that will pull the wires. Here’s
the fifty you ask for and welcome,—don’t hurry about paying it back. I am doing you a
good turn this year by sending you a friend,—a real friend, mind you!—no sham. He
brings you a letter of introduction from me, and between ourselves, old man, you
cannot do better than put yourself and your literary affairs entirely in his hands. He
knows everybody, and is up to all the dodges of editorial management and newspaper
cliques. He is a great philanthropist besides,—and seems particularly fond of the
society of the clergy. Rather a queer taste you will say, but his reason for such
preference is, as he has explained to me quite frankly, that he is so enormously wealthy
that he does not quite know what to do with his money, and the reverend gentlemen of
the church are generally ready to show him how to spend some of it. He is always glad
to know of some quarter where his money and influence (he is very influential) may be
useful to others. He has helped me out of a very serious hobble, and I owe him a big
debt of gratitude. I’ve told him all about you,—what a smart fellow you are, and what
a lot dear old Alma Mater thought of you, and he has promised to give you a lift up. He
can do anything he likes; very naturally, seeing that the whole world of morals,
civilization and the rest is subservient to the power of money,—and his stock of cash
appears to be limitless. Use him; he is willing and ready to be used,—and write and let
me know how you get on. Don’t bother about the fifty till you feel you have tided over
the storm.
Ever yours
Boffles. 
I laughed as I read the absurd signature, though my eyes were dim with something
like tears. ‘Boffles’ was the nickname given to my friend by several of our college
companions, and neither he nor I knew how it first arose. But no one except the dons
ever addressed him by his proper name, which was John Carrington,—he was simply
‘Boffles,’ and Boffles he remained even now for all those who had been his intimates. I
refolded and put by his letter and the draft for the fifty pounds, and with a passing
vague wonder as to what manner of man the ‘philanthropist’ might be who had more
money than he knew what to do with, I turned to the consideration of my other two
correspondents, relieved to feel that now, whatever happened, I could settle up arrears
with my landlady the next day as I had promised. Moreover I could order some supper,
and have a fire lit to cheer my chilly room. Before attending to these creature comforts
however, I opened the long blue envelope that looked so like a threat of legal
proceedings, and unfolding the paper within, stared at it amazedly. What was it all
about? The written characters danced before my eyes,—puzzled and bewildered, I
found myself reading the thing over and over again without any clear comprehension
of it. Presently a glimmer of meaning flashed upon me, startling my senses like an
electric shock, ... no—no—!—impossible! Fortune never could be so mad as this!—
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 8/257 never so wildly capricious and grotesque of humour! It was some senseless hoax that
was being practised upon me, ... and yet, ... if it were a joke, it was a very elaborate and
remarkable one! Weighted with the majesty of the law too! ... Upon my word and by
all the fantastical freakish destinies that govern human affairs, the news seemed
actually positive and genuine!
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 9/257 S