III
HE door opened,—and from the dense obscurity enshrouding me I could just
perceive a tall shadowy figure standing on the threshold. I remember well the
curious impression the mere outline of this scarcely discerned Form made upon
me even then,—suggesting at the first glance such a stately majesty of height and
bearing as at once riveted my attention,—so much so indeed that I scarcely heard my
landlady’s introductory words “A gentleman to see you sir,”—words that were quickly
interrupted by a murmur of dismay at finding the room in total darkness. “Well to be
sure! The lamp must have gone out!” she exclaimed,—then addressing the personage
she had ushered thus far, she added—“I’m afraid Mr Tempest isn’t in after all, sir,
though I certainly saw him about half-an-hour ago. If you don’t mind waiting here a
minute I’ll fetch a light and see if he has left any message on his table.”
She hurried away, and though I knew that of course I ought to speak, a singular
and quite inexplicable perversity of humour kept me silent and unwilling to declare my
presence. Meanwhile the tall stranger advanced a pace or two, and a rich voice with a
ring of ironical amusement in it called me by my name—
“Geoffrey Tempest, are you there?”
Why could I not answer? The strangest and most unnatural obstinacy stiffened my
tongue,—and, concealed in the gloom of my forlorn literary den I still held my peace.
The majestic figure drew nearer, till in height and breadth it seemed to suddenly
overshadow me; and once again the voice called—
“Geoffrey Tempest, are you there?”
For very shame’s sake I could hold out no longer,—and with a determined effort I
broke the extraordinary dumb spell that had held me like a coward in silent hiding, and
came forward boldly to confront my visitor.
“Yes I am here,” I said—“And being here I am ashamed to give you such a
welcome as this. You are Prince Rimânez of course;—I have just read your note which
prepared me for your visit, but I was hoping that my landlady, finding the room in
darkness, would conclude I was out, and show you downstairs again. You see I am
perfectly frank!”
“You are indeed!” returned the stranger, his deep tones still vibrating with the
silvery clang of veiled satire—“So frank that I cannot fail to understand you. Briefly,
and without courtesy, you resent my visit this evening and wish I had not come!”
This open declaration of my mood sounded so brusque that I made haste to deny
it, though I knew it to be true. Truth, even in trifles, always seems unpleasant!
“Pray do not think me so churlish,”—I said—“The fact is, I only opened your
letter a few minutes ago, and before I could make any arrangements to receive you, the
lamp went out, with the awkward result that I am forced to greet you in this unsociable
darkness, which is almost too dense to shake hands in.”
“Shall we try?” my visitor enquired, with a sudden softening of accent that gave
his words a singular charm; “Here is my hand,—if yours has any friendly instinct in it
the twain will meet,—quite blindly and without guidance!”
I at once extended my hand, and it was instantly clasped in a warm and somewhat
masterful manner. At that moment a light flashed on the scene,—my landlady entered,
bearing what she called ‘her best lamp’ alit, and set it on the table. I believe she uttered
some exclamation of surprise at seeing me,—she may have said anything or nothing,—
I did not hear or heed, so entirely was I amazed and fascinated by the appearance of the
man whose long slender hand still held mine. I am myself an average good height, but
he was fully half a head taller than I, if not more than that,—and as I looked straightly
at him, I thought I had never seen so much beauty and intellectuality combined in the
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 13/257 outward personality of any human being. The finely shaped head denoted both power
and wisdom, and was nobly poised on such shoulders as might have befitted a
Hercules,—the countenance was a pure oval, and singularly pale, this complexion
intensifying the almost fiery brilliancy of the full dark eyes, which had in them a
curious and wonderfully attractive look of mingled mirth and misery. The mouth was
perhaps the most telling feature in this remarkable face,—set in the perfect curve of
beauty, it was yet firm, determined, and not too small, thus escaping effeminacy,—and
I noted that in repose it expressed bitterness, disdain and even cruelty. But with the
light of a smile upon it, it signified, or seemed to signify, something more subtle than
any passion to which we can give a name, and already with the rapidity of a lightning
flash, I caught myself wondering what that mystic undeclared something might be. At
a glance I comprehended these primary details of my new acquaintance’s eminently
prepossessing appearance, and when my hand dropped from his close grasp I felt as if I
had known him all my life! And now face to face with him in the bright lamp-light, I
remembered my actual surroundings,—the bare cold room, the lack of fire, the black
soot that sprinkled the nearly carpetless floor,—my own shabby clothes and deplorable
aspect, as compared with this regal-looking individual, who carried the visible
evidence of wealth upon him in the superb Russian sables that lined and bordered his
long overcoat which he now partially unfastened and threw open with a carelessly
imperial air, the while he regarded me, smiling.
“I know I have come at an awkward moment,” he said—“I always do! It is my
peculiar misfortune. Well-bred people never intrude where they are not wanted,—and
in this particular I’m afraid my manners leave much to be desired. Try to forgive me if
you can, for the sake of this,”—and he held out a letter addressed to me in my friend
Carrington’s familiar handwriting. “And permit me to sit down while you read my
credentials.”
He took a chair and seated himself. I observed his handsome face and easy
attitude with renewed admiration.
“No credentials are necessary,” I said with all the cordiality I now really felt—“I
have already had a letter from Carrington in which he speaks of you in the highest and
most grateful terms. But the fact is——well!—really, prince, you must excuse me if I
seem confused or astonished ... I had expected to see quite an old man ...”
And I broke off, somewhat embarrassed by the keen glance of the brilliant eyes
that met mine so fixedly.
“No one is old, my dear sir, nowadays!” he declared lightly—“even the
grandmothers and grandfathers are friskier at fifty than they were at fifteen. One does
not talk of age at all now in polite society,—it is ill-bred, even coarse. Indecent things
are unmentionable—age has become an indecent thing. It is therefore avoided in
conversation. You expected to see an old man you say? Well, you are not disappointed
—I am old. In fact you have no idea how very old I am!”
I laughed at this piece of absurdity.
“Why, you are younger than I,”—I said—“or if not, you look it.”
“Ah, my looks belie me!” he returned gaily—“I am like several of the most noted
fashionable beauties,—much riper than I seem. But come, read the introductory
missive I have brought you,—I shall not be satisfied till you do.”
Thus requested, and wishing to prove myself as courteous as I had hitherto been
brusque, I at once opened my friend’s note and read as follows,—
Dear Geoffrey.
The bearer of this, Prince Rimânez, is a very distinguished scholar
and gentleman, allied by descent to one of the oldest families in Europe, or for that
matter, in the world. You, as a student and lover of ancient history, will be interested to
know that his ancestors were originally princes of Chaldea, who afterwards settled in
Tyre,—from thence they went to Etruria and there continued through many centuries,
the last scion of the house being the very gifted and genial personage who, as my good
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 14/257 friend, I have the pleasure of commending to your kindest regard. Certain troublous
and overpowering circumstances have forced him into exile from his native province,
and deprived him of a great part of his possessions, so that he is, to a considerable
extent a wanderer on the face of the earth, and has travelled far and seen much, and has
a wide experience of men and things. He is a poet and musician of great skill, and
though he occupies himself with the arts solely for his own amusement, I think you
will find his practical knowledge of literary matters eminently useful to you in your
difficult career. I must not forget to add that in all matters scientific he is an absolute
master. Wishing you both a cordial friendship, I am, dear Geoffrey,
Yours sincerely
John Carrington. 
The signature of ‘Boffles’ had evidently been deemed out of place this time and
somehow I was foolishly vexed at its omission. There seemed to be something formal
and stiff in the letter, almost as if it had been written to dictation, and under pressure.
What gave me this idea I know not. I glanced furtively at my silent companion,—he
caught my stray look and returned it with a curiously grave fixity. Fearing lest my
momentary vague distrust of him had been reflected in my eyes I made haste to
speak—
“This letter, prince, adds to my shame and regret that I should have greeted you in
so churlish a manner this evening. No apology can condone my rudeness,—but you
cannot imagine how mortified I felt and still feel, to be compelled to receive you in this
miserable den,—it is not at all the sort of place in which I should have liked to
welcome you....” And I broke off with a renewed sense of irritation, remembering how
actually rich I now was, and that in spite of this, I was obliged to seem poor.
Meanwhile the prince waived aside my remarks with a light gesture of his hand.
“Why be mortified?” he demanded. “Rather be proud that you can dispense with
the vulgar appurtenances of luxury. Genius thrives in a garret and dies in a palace,—is
not that the generally accepted theory?”
“Rather a worn-out and mistaken one I consider,”—I replied; “Genius might like
to try the effect of a palace for once,—it usually dies of starvation.”
“True!—but in thus dying, think how many fools it afterwards fattens! There is an
all-wise Providence in this, my dear sir! Schubert perished of want,—but see what
large profits all the music-publishers have made since out of his compositions! It is a
most beautiful dispensation of nature,—that honest folk should be sacrificed in order to
provide for the sustenance of knaves!”
He laughed, and I looked at him in a little surprise. His remark touched so near
my own opinions that I wondered whether he were in jest or earnest.
“You speak sarcastically of course?” I said—“You do not really believe what you
say?”
“Oh, do I not!” he returned, with a flash of his fine eyes that was almost lightning-
like in its intensity—“If I could not believe the teaching of my own experience, what
would be left to me? I always realize the ‘needs must’ of things—how does the old
maxim go—‘needs must when the devil drives.’ There is really no possible
contradiction to offer to the accuracy of that statement. The devil drives the world,
whip in hand,—and oddly enough, (considering that some belated folk still fancy there
is a God somewhere) succeeds in managing his team with extraordinary ease!” His
brow clouded and the bitter lines about his mouth deepened and hardened,—anon he
laughed again lightly and continued—“But let us not moralize,—morals sicken the
soul both in church and out of it,—every sensible man hates to be told what he could
be and what he won’t be. I am here to make friends with you if you permit,—and to put
an end to ceremony, will you accompany me back to my hotel where I have ordered
supper?”
By this time I had become indescribably fascinated by his easy manner, handsome
presence and mellifluous voice,—the satirical turn of his humour suited mine,—I felt
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 15/257 we should get on well together,—and my first annoyance at being discovered by him in
such poverty-stricken circumstances somewhat abated.
“With pleasure!” I replied—“But first of all, you must allow me to explain
matters a little. You have heard a good deal about my affairs from my friend John
Carrington, and I know from his private letter to me that you have come here out of
pure kindness and goodwill. For that generous intention I thank you! I know you
expected to find a poor wretch of a literary man struggling with the direst
circumstances of disappointment and poverty,—and a couple of hours ago you would
have amply fulfilled that expectation. But now, things have changed,—I have received
news which completely alters my position,—in fact I have had a very great and
remarkable surprise this evening....”
“An agreeable one I trust?” interposed my companion suavely.
I smiled.
“Judge for yourself!” And I handed him the lawyer’s letter which informed me of
my suddenly acquired fortune.
He glanced it through rapidly,—then folded and returned it to me with a courteous
bow.
“I suppose I should congratulate you,”—he said—“And I do. Though of course
this wealth which seems to content you, to me appears a mere trifle. It can be quite
conveniently run through and exhausted in about eight years or less, therefore it does
not provide absolute immunity from care. To be rich, really rich, in my sense of the
word, one should have about a million a year. Then one might reasonably hope to
escape the workhouse!”
He laughed,—and I stared at him stupidly, not knowing how to take his words,
whether as truth or idle boasting. Five millions of money a mere trifle! He went on
without apparently noticing my amazement—
“The inexhaustible greed of a man, my dear sir, can never be satisfied. If he is not
consumed by desire for one thing, he is for another, and his tastes are generally
expensive. A few pretty and unscrupulous women for example, would soon relieve you
of your five millions in the purchase of jewels alone. Horse-racing would do it still
more quickly. No, no,—you are not rich,—you are still poor,—only your needs are no
longer so pressing as they were. And in this I confess myself somewhat disappointed,
—for I came to you hoping to do a good turn to some one for once in my life, and to
play the foster-father to a rising genius—and here I am—forestalled,—as usual! It is a
singular thing, do you know, but nevertheless a fact, that whenever I have had any
particular intentions towards a man I am always forestalled! It is really rather hard
upon me!” He broke off and raised his head in a listening attitude.
“What is that?” he asked.
It was the violinist next door playing a well-known “Ave Maria.” I told him so.
“Dismal,—very dismal!” he said with a contemptuous shrug. “I hate all that kind
of mawkish devotional stuff. Well!—millionaire as you are, and acknowledged lion of
society as you shortly will be, there is no objection I hope, to the proposed supper?
And perhaps a music-hall afterwards if you feel inclined,—what do you say?”
He clapped me on the shoulder cordially and looked straight into my face,—those
wonderful eyes of his, suggestive of both tears and fire, fixed me with a clear masterful
gaze that completely dominated me. I made no attempt to resist the singular attraction
which now possessed me for this man whom I had but just met,—the sensation was too
strong and too pleasant to be combated. Only for one moment more I hesitated, looking
down at my shabby attire.
“I am not fit to accompany you, prince,” I said—“I look more like a tramp than a
millionaire.”
He glanced at me and smiled.
“Upon my life, so you do!” he averred.—“But be satisfied!—you are in this
respect very like many another Crœsus. It is only the poor and proud who take the
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 16/257 trouble to dress well,—they and the dear ‘naughty’ ladies, generally monopolize
tasteful and becoming attire. An ill-fitting coat often adorns the back of a Prime
Minister,—and if you see a woman clad in clothes vilely cut and coloured, you may be
sure she is eminently virtuous, renowned for good works, and probably a duchess!” He
rose, drawing his sables about him.
“What matter the coat if the purse be full!” he continued gaily.—“Let it once be
properly paragraphed in the papers that you are a millionaire, and doubtless some
enterprising tailor will invent a ‘Tempest’ ulster coloured softly like your present garb,
an artistic mildewy green! And now come along,—your solicitor’s communication
should have given you a good appetite, or it is not so valuable as it seems,—and I want
you to do justice to my supper. I have my own chef with me, and he is not without
skill. I hope, by the way, you will at least do me this much service,—that pending legal
discussion and settlement of your affairs, you will let me be your banker?”
This offer was made with such an air of courteous delicacy and friendship, that I
could do no more than accept it gratefully, as it relieved me from all temporary
embarrassment. I hastily wrote a few lines to my landlady, telling her she would
receive the money owing to her by post next day,—then, thrusting my rejected
manuscript, my only worldly possession, into my coat-pocket, I extinguished the lamp,
and with the new friend I had so suddenly gained, I left my dismal lodgings and all its
miserable associations for ever. I little thought the time would come when I should
look back to the time spent in that small mean room as the best period of my life,—
when I should regard the bitter poverty I then endured, as the stern but holy angel
meant to guide me to the highest and noblest attainment,—when I should pray
desperately with wild tears to be as I was then, rather than as I am now! Is it well or ill
for us I wonder, that the future is hidden from our knowledge? Should we steer our
ways clearer from evil if we knew its result? It is a doubtful question,—at anyrate my
ignorance for the moment was indeed bliss. I went joyfully out of the dreary house
where I had lived so long among disappointments and difficulties, turning my back
upon it with such a sense of relief as could never be expressed in words,—and the last
thing I heard as I passed into the street with my companion, was a plaintive long-drawn
wail of minor melody, which seemed to be sent after me like a parting cry, by the
unknown and invisible player of the violin.
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 17/257 O