VI
APPROACHED and examined the box he held. It was perforated with finely drilled
holes for the admission of air, and within it lay a brilliant winged insect coloured
with all the tints and half-tints of the rainbow.
“Is it alive?” I asked.
“It is alive, and has a sufficient share of intelligence,”—replied Rimânez. “I feed
it and it knows me,—that is the utmost you can say of the most civilized human
beings; they know what feeds them. It is quite tame and friendly as you perceive,”—
and opening the case he gently advanced his forefinger. The glittering beetle’s body
palpitated with the hues of an opal; its radiant wings expanded, and it rose at once to its
protector’s hand and clung there. He lifted it out and held it aloft, then shaking it to and
fro lightly, he exclaimed—
“Off, Sprite! Fly, and return to me!”
The creature soared away through the room and round and round the ceiling,
looking like a beautiful iridescent jewel, the whirr of its wings making a faint buzzing
sound as it flew. I watched it fascinated, till after a few graceful movements hither and
thither, it returned to its owner’s still outstretched hand, and again settled there making
no further attempt to fly.
“There is a well-worn platitude which declares that ‘in the midst of life we are in
death’”—said the prince then softly, bending his dark deep eyes on the insect’s
quivering wings—“But as a matter of fact that maxim is wrong as so many trite human
maxims are. It should be ‘in the midst of death we are in life.’ This creature is a rare
and curious production of death, but not I believe the only one of its kind. Others have
been found under precisely similar circumstances. I took possession of this one myself
in rather a weird fashion,—will the story bore you?”
“On the contrary”—I rejoined eagerly, my eyes fixed on the radiant bat-shaped
thing that glittered in the light as though its veins were phosphorescent.
He paused a moment, watching me.
“Well,—it happened simply thus,—I was present at the uncasing of an Egyptian
female mummy;—her talismans described her as a princess of a famous royal house.
Several curious jewels were tied round her neck, and on her chest was a piece of
beaten gold quarter of an inch thick. Underneath this gold plate, her body was swathed
round and round in an unusual number of scented wrappings; and when these were
removed it was discovered that the mummified flesh between her breasts had decayed
away, and in the hollow or nest thus formed by the process of decomposition, this
insect I hold was found alive, as brilliant in colour as it is now!”
I could not repress a slight nervous shudder.
“Horrible!” I said—“I confess, if I were you, I should not care to make a pet of
such an uncanny object. I should kill it, I think.”
He kept his bright intent gaze upon me.
“Why?” he asked. “I’m afraid, my dear Geoffrey, you are not disposed to study
science. To kill the poor thing who managed to find life in the very bosom of death, is
a cruel suggestion, is it not? To me, this unclassified insect is a valuable proof (if I
needed one) of the indestructibility of the germs of conscious existence; it has eyes,
and the senses of taste, smell, touch and hearing,—and it gained these together with its
intelligence, out of the dead flesh of a woman who lived, and no doubt loved and
sinned and suffered more than four thousand years ago!” He broke off,—then suddenly
added—“All the same I frankly admit to you that I believe it to be an evil creature. I do
indeed! But I like it none the less for that. In fact I have rather a fantastic notion about
it myself. I am much inclined to accept the idea of the transmigration of souls, and so I
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 32/257 please my humour sometimes by thinking that perhaps the princess of that Royal
Egyptian house had a wicked, brilliant, vampire soul,—and that ... here it is!”
A cold thrill ran through me from head to foot at these words, and as I looked at
the speaker standing opposite me in the wintry light, dark and tall, with the ‘wicked,
brilliant, vampire soul’ clinging to his hand, there seemed to me to be a sudden
hideousness declared in his excessive personal beauty. I was conscious of a vague
terror, but I attributed it to the gruesome nature of the story, and, determining to
combat my sensations, I examined the weird insect more closely. As I did so, its bright
beady eyes sparkled, I thought, vindictively, and I stepped back, vexed with myself at
the foolish fear of the thing which overpowered me.
“It is certainly remarkable,”—I murmured—“No wonder you value it,—as a
curiosity. Its eyes are quite distinct, almost intelligent in fact.”
“No doubt she had beautiful eyes,”—said Rimânez smiling.
“She? Whom do you mean?”
“The princess, of course!” he answered, evidently amused; “The dear dead lady,
—some of whose personality must be in this creature, seeing that it had nothing but her
body to nourish itself upon.”
And here he replaced the creature in its crystal habitation with the utmost care.
“I suppose”—I said slowly, “you, in your pursuit of science, would infer from this
that nothing actually perishes completely?”
“Exactly!” returned Rimânez emphatically. “There, my dear Tempest, is the
mischief,—or the deity,—of things. Nothing can be entirely annihilated;—not even a
thought.”
I was silent, watching him while he put the glass case with its uncanny occupant
away out of sight.
“And now for luncheon,” he said gaily, passing his arm through mine—“You look
twenty per cent. better than when you went out this morning, Geoffrey, so I conclude
your legal matters are disposed of satisfactorily. And what else have you done with
yourself?”
Seated at table with the dark-faced Amiel in attendance, I related my morning’s
adventures, dwelling at length on my chance meeting with the publisher who had on
the previous day refused my manuscript, and who now, I felt sure, would be only too
glad to close with the offer I had made him. Rimânez listened attentively, smiling now
and then.
“Of course!” he said, when I had concluded. “There is nothing in the least
surprising in the conduct of the worthy man. In fact I think he showed remarkable
discretion and decency in not at once jumping at your proposition,—his pleasant
hypocrisy in retiring to think it over, shows him to be a person of tact and foresight.
Did you ever imagine that a human being or a human conscience existed that could not
be bought? My good fellow, you can buy a king if you only give a long price enough;
and the Pope will sell you a specially reserved seat in his heaven if you will only hand
him the cash down while he is on earth! Nothing is given free in this world save the air
and the sunshine,—everything else must be bought,—with blood, tears and groans
occasionally,—but oftenest with money.”
I fancied that Amiel, behind his master’s chair, smiled darkly at this,—and my
instinctive dislike of the fellow kept me more or less reticent concerning my affairs till
the luncheon was over. I could not formulate to myself any substantial reason for my
aversion to this confidential servant of the prince’s,—but do what I would the aversion
remained, and increased each time I saw his sullen, and as I thought, sneering features.
Yet he was perfectly respectful and deferential; I could find no actual fault with him,—
nevertheless when at last he placed the coffee, cognac, and cigars on the table and
noiselessly withdrew, I was conscious of a great relief, and breathed more freely. As
soon as we were alone, Rimânez lit a cigar and settled himself for a smoke, looking
over at me with a personal interest and kindness which made his handsome face more
than ever attractive.
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 33/257 “Now let us talk,”—he said—“I believe I am at present the best friend you have,
and I certainly know the world better than you do. What do you propose to make of
your life? Or in other words how do you mean to begin spending your money?”
I laughed. “Well, I shan’t provide funds for the building of a church, or the
endowment of a hospital,”—I said—“I shall not even start a Free Library, for these
institutions, besides becoming centres for infectious diseases, generally get presided
over by a committee of local grocers who presume to consider themselves judges of
literature. My dear Prince Rimânez, I mean to spend my money on my own pleasure,
and I daresay I shall find plenty of ways to do it.”
Rimânez fanned away the smoke of his cigar with one hand, and his dark eyes
shone with a peculiarly vivid light through the pale grey floating haze.
“With your fortune, you could make hundreds of miserable people happy;”—he
suggested.
“Thanks, I would rather be happy myself first”—I answered gaily—“I daresay I
seem to you selfish,—you are philanthropic I know; I am not.”
He still regarded me steadily.
“You might help your fellow-workers in literature....”
I interrupted him with a decided gesture.
“That I will never do, my friend, though the heavens should crack! My fellow-
workers in literature have kicked me down at every opportunity, and done their best to
keep me from earning a bare livelihood,—it is my turn at kicking now, and I will show
them as little mercy, as little help, as little sympathy as they have shown me!”
“Revenge is sweet!” he quoted sententiously—“I should recommend your starting
a high-class half-crown magazine.”
“Why?”
“Can you ask? Just think of the ferocious satisfaction it would give you to receive
the manuscripts of your literary enemies, and reject them! To throw their letters into
the waste-paper basket, and send back their poems, stories, political articles and what
not, with ‘Returned with thanks’ or ‘Not up to our mark’ type-written on the backs
thereof! To dig knives into your rivals through the medium of anonymous criticism!
The howling joy of a savage with twenty scalps at his belt would be tame in
comparison to it! I was an editor once myself, and I know!”
I laughed at his whimsical earnestness.
“I daresay you are right,”—I said—“I can grasp the vengeful position thoroughly!
But the management of a magazine would be too much trouble to me,—too much of a
tie.”
“Don’t manage it! Follow the example of all the big editors, and live out of the
business altogether,—but take the profits! You never see the real editor of a leading
daily newspaper you know,—you can only interview the sub. The real man is,
according to the seasons of the year, at Ascot, in Scotland, at Newmarket, or wintering
in Egypt,—he is supposed to be responsible for everything in his journal, but he is
generally the last person who knows anything about it. He relies on his ‘staff’—a very
bad crutch at times,—and when his ‘staff’ are in a difficulty, they get out of it by
saying they are unable to decide without the editor. Meanwhile the editor is miles
away, comfortably free from worry. You could bamboozle the public in that way if you
liked.”
“I could, but I shouldn’t care to do so,” I answered—“If I had a business I would
not neglect it. I believe in doing things thoroughly.”
“So do I!” responded Rimânez promptly. “I am a very thorough-going fellow
myself, and whatever my hand findeth to do, I do it with my might!—excuse me for
quoting Scripture!” He smiled, a little ironically I thought, then resumed—“Well, in
what, at present does your idea of enjoying your heritage consist?”
“In publishing my book,” I answered. “That very book I could get no one to
accept,—I tell you, I will make it the talk of London!”
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 34/257 “Possibly you will”—he said, looking at me through half-closed eyes and a cloud
of smoke,—“London easily talks. Particularly on unsavoury and questionable subjects.
Therefore,—as I have already hinted,—if your book were a judicious mixture of Zola,
Huysmans and Baudelaire, or had for its heroine a ‘modest’ maid who considered
honourable marriage a ‘degradation,’ it would be quite sure of success in these days of
new Sodom and Gomorrah.” Here he suddenly sprang up, and flinging away his cigar,
confronted me. “Why do not the heavens rain fire on this accursed city! It is ripe for
punishment,—full of abhorrent creatures not worth the torturing in hell to which it is
said liars and hypocrites are condemned! Tempest, if there is one human being more
than another that I utterly abhor, it is the type of man so common to the present time,
the man who huddles his own loathly vices under a cloak of assumed broad-
mindedness and virtue. Such an one will even deify the loss of chastity in woman by
the name of ‘purity,’—because he knows that it is by her moral and physical ruin alone
that he can gratify his brutal lusts. Rather than be such a sanctimonious coward I would
openly proclaim myself vile!”
“That is because yours is a noble nature”—I said—“You are an exception to the
rule.”
“An exception? I?”—and he laughed bitterly—“Yes, you are right; I am an
exception among men perhaps,—but I am one with the beasts in honesty! The lion
does not assume the manners of the dove,—he loudly announces his own ferocity. The
very cobra, stealthy though its movements be, evinces its meaning by a warning hiss or
rattle. The hungry wolf’s bay is heard far down the wind, intimidating the hurrying
traveller among the wastes of snow. But man gives no clue to his intent—more
malignant than the lion, more treacherous than the snake, more greedy than the wolf,
he takes his fellow-man’s hand in pretended friendship, and an hour later defames his
character behind his back,—with a smiling face he hides a false and selfish heart,—
flinging his pigmy mockery at the riddle of the Universe, he stands gibing at God,
feebly a-straddle on his own earth-grave—Heavens!”—here he stopped short with a
passionate gesture—“What should the Eternities do with such a thankless, blind worm
as he!”
His voice rang out with singular emphasis,—his eyes glowed with a fiery ardour;
startled by his impressive manner I let my cigar die out and stared at him in mute
amazement. What an inspired countenance!—what an imposing figure!—how
sovereignly supreme and almost god-like in his looks he seemed at the moment;—and
yet there was something terrifying in his attitude of protest and defiance. He caught my
wondering glance,—the glow of passion faded from his face,—he laughed and
shrugged his shoulders.
“I think I was born to be an actor”—he said carelessly—“Now and then the love
of declamation masters me. Then I speak—as Prime Ministers and men in Parliament
speak—to suit the humour of the hour, and without meaning a single word I say!”
“I cannot accept that statement”—I answered him, smiling a little—“You do mean
what you say,—though I fancy you are rather a creature of impulse.”
“Do you really!” he exclaimed—“How wise of you!—good Geoffrey Tempest,
how very wise of you! But you are wrong. There never was a being created who was
less impulsive, or more charged with set purpose than I. Believe me or not as you like,
—belief is a sentiment that cannot be forced. If I told you that I am a dangerous
companion,—that I like evil things better than good,—that I am not a safe guide for
any man, what would you think?”
“I should think you were whimsically fond of under-estimating your own
qualities”—I said, re-lighting my cigar, and feeling somewhat amused by his
earnestness—“And I should like you just as well as I do now,—perhaps better,—
though that would be difficult.”
At these words, he seated himself, bending his steadfast dark eyes full upon me.
“Tempest, you follow the fashion of the prettiest women about town,—they
always like the greatest scoundrels!”
“But you are not a scoundrel;”—I rejoined, smoking peacefully.
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 35/257 “No,—I’m not a scoundrel, but there’s a good deal of the devil in me.”
“All the better!” I said, stretching myself out in my chair with lazy comfort—“I
hope there’s something of him in me too.”
“Do you believe in him?” asked Rimânez smiling.
“The devil? of course not!”
“He is a very fascinating legendary personage;”—continued the prince, lighting
another cigar and beginning to puff at it slowly—“And he is the subject of many a fine
story. Picture his fall from heaven!—‘Lucifer Son of the Morning’—what a title, and
what a birthright! To be born of the morning implies to be a creature formed of
translucent light undefiled, with all the warm rose of a million orbs of day colouring
his bright essence, and all the lustre of fiery planets flaming in his eyes. Splendid and
supreme, at the right hand of Deity itself he stood, this majestic Arch-angel, and before
his unwearied vision rolled the grandest creative splendours of God’s thoughts and
dreams. All at once he perceived in the vista of embryonic things a new small world,
and on it a being forming itself slowly as it were into the Angelic likeness,—a being
weak yet strong, sublime yet foolish,—a strange paradox, destined to work its way
through all the phases of life, till imbibing the very breath and soul of the Creator it
should touch Conscious Immortality,—Eternal Joy. Then Lucifer, full of wrath, turned
on the Master of the Spheres, and flung forth his reckless defiance, crying aloud
—‘Wilt thou make of this slight poor creature an Angel even as I? I do protest against
thee and condemn! Lo, if thou makest Man in Our image I will destroy him utterly, as
unfit to share with me the splendours of Thy Wisdom,—the glory of Thy love!’ And
the Voice Supreme in accents terrible and beautiful replied; ‘Lucifer, Son of the
Morning, full well dost thou know that never can an idle or wasted word be spoken
before Me. For Free-will is the gift of the Immortals; therefore what thou sayest, thou
must needs do! Fall, proud Spirit from thy high estate!—thou and thy companions with
thee!—and return no more till Man himself redeem thee! Each human soul that yields
unto thy tempting shall be a new barrier set between thee and heaven; each one that of
its own choice doth repel and overcome thee, shall lift thee nearer thy lost home! When
the world rejects thee, I will pardon and again receive thee,—but not till then.’”
“I never heard exactly that version of the legend before,”—I said,—“The idea that
Man should redeem the devil is quite new to me.”
“Is it?” and he looked at me fixedly—“Well—it is one form of the story, and by
no means the most unpoetical. Poor Lucifer! His punishment is of course eternal, and
the distance between himself and Heaven must be rapidly increasing every day,—for
Man will never assist him to retrieve his error. Man will reject God fast enough and
gladly enough—but never the devil. Judge then, how, under the peculiar circumstances
of his doom, this ‘Lucifer, Son of the Morning,’ Satan, or whatever else he is called,
must hate Humanity!”
I smiled. “Well he has one remedy left to him”—I observed—“He need not tempt
anybody.”
“You forget!—he is bound to keep his word, according to the legend”—said
Rimânez—“He swore before God that he would destroy Man utterly,—he must
therefore fulfil that oath, if he can. Angels, it would seem, may not swear before the
Eternal without endeavouring at least to fulfil their vows,—men swear in the name of
God every day without the slightest intention of carrying out their promises.”
“But it’s all the veriest nonsense,”—I said somewhat impatiently—“All these old
legends are rubbish. You tell the story well, and almost as if you believed in it,—that is
because you have the gift of speaking with eloquence. Nowadays no one believes in
either devils or angels;—I, for example, do not even believe in the soul.”
“I know you do not”—he answered suavely—“And your scepticism is very
comfortable because it relieves you of all personal responsibility. I envy you! For—I
regret to say, I am compelled to believe in the soul.”
“Compelled!” I echoed—“That is absurd—no one can compel you to accept a
mere theory.”
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 36/257 He looked at me with a flitting smile that darkened rather than lightened his face.
“True! very true! There is no compelling force in the whole Universe,—Man is
the supreme and independent creature,—master of all he surveys and owning no other
dominion save his personal desire. True—I forgot! Let us avoid theology, please, and
psychology also,—let us talk about the only subject that has any sense or interest in it
—namely, Money. I perceive your present plans are definite,—you wish to publish a
book that shall create a stir and make you famous. It seems a modest enough
campaign! Have you no wider ambitions? There are several ways, you know, of getting
talked about. Shall I enumerate them for your consideration?”
I laughed. “If you like!”
“Well, in the first place I should suggest your getting yourself properly
paragraphed. It must be known to the press that you are an exceedingly rich man.
There is an Agency for the circulation of paragraphs,—I daresay they’ll do it
sufficiently well for about ten or twenty guineas.”
I opened my eyes a little at this.
“Oh, is that the way these things are done?”
“My dear fellow, how else should they be done?” he demanded somewhat
impatiently—“Do you think anything in the world is done without money? Are the
poor, hard-working journalists your brothers or your bosom friends that they should lift
you into public notice without getting something for their trouble? If you do not
manage them properly in this way, they’ll abuse you quite heartily and free of cost,—
that I can promise you! I know a ‘literary agent,’ a very worthy man too, who for a
hundred guineas down, will so ply the paragraph wheel that in a few weeks it shall
seem to the outside public that Geoffrey Tempest, the millionaire, is the only person
worth talking about, and the one desirable creature whom to shake hands with is next
in honour to meeting Royalty itself.”
“Secure him!” I said indolently—“And pay him two hundred guineas! So shall all
the world hear of me!”
“When you have been paragraphed thoroughly,” went on Rimânez—“the next
move will be a dash into what is called ‘swagger’ society. This must be done cautiously
and by degrees. You must be presented at the first Levée of the season, and later on, I
will get you an invitation to some great lady’s house, where you will meet the Prince of
Wales privately at dinner. If you can oblige or please His Royal Highness in any way
so much the better for you,—he is at least the most popular royalty in Europe, so it
should not be difficult to you to make yourself agreeable. Following upon this event,
you must purchase a fine country seat, and have that fact ‘paragraphed’—then you can
rest and look round,—Society will have taken you up, and you will find yourself in the
swim!”
I laughed heartily,—well entertained by his fluent discourse.
“I should not,” he resumed—“propose your putting yourself to the trouble of
getting into Parliament. That is no longer necessary to the career of a gentleman. But I
should strongly recommend your winning the Derby.”
“I daresay you would!” I answered mirthfully—“It’s an admirable suggestion,—
but not very easy to follow!”
“If you wish to win the Derby,” he rejoined quietly—“you shall win it. I’ll
guarantee both horse and jockey!”
Something in his decisive tone impressed me, and I leaned forward to study his
features more closely.
“Are you a worker of miracles?” I asked him jestingly—“Do you mean it?”
“Try me!” he responded—“Shall I enter a horse for you?”
“You can’t; it’s too late,” I said. “You would need to be the devil himself to do it.
Besides I don’t care about racing.”
“You will have to amend your taste then,”—he replied—“That is, if you want to
make yourself agreeable to the English aristocracy, for they are interested in little else.
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 37/257 No really great lady is without her betting book, though she may be deficient in her
knowledge of spelling. You may make the biggest literary furore of the season, and that
will count as nothing among ‘swagger’ people, but if you win the Derby you will be a
really famous man. Personally speaking I have a great deal to do with racing,—in fact I
am devoted to it. I am always present at every great race,—I never miss one; I always
bet, and I never lose! And now let me proceed with your social plan of action. After
winning the Derby you will enter for a yacht race at Cowes, and allow the Prince of
Wales to beat you just narrowly. Then you will give a grand dinner, arranged by a
perfect chef,—and you will entertain His Royal Highness to the strains of ‘Britannia
rules the waves,’ which will serve as a pretty compliment. You will allude to the same
well-worn song in a graceful speech,—and the probable result of all this will be one, or
perhaps two Royal invitations. So far, so good. With the heats of summer you will go
to Homburg to drink the waters there whether you require them or not,—and in the
autumn you will assemble a shooting-party at the country seat before-mentioned which
you will have purchased, and invite Royalty to join you in killing the poor little
partridges. Then your name in society may be considered as made, and you can marry
whatever fair lady happens to be in the market!”
“Thanks!—much obliged!” and I gave way to hearty laughter—“Upon my word
Lucio, your programme is perfect! It lacks nothing!”
“It is the orthodox round of social success,” said Lucio with admirable gravity
—“Intellect and originality have nothing whatever to do with it,—only money is
needed to perform it all.”
“You forget my book”—I interposed—“I know there is some intellect in that, and
some originality too. Surely that will give me an extra lift up the heights of fashionable
light and leading.”
“I doubt it!” he answered—“I very much doubt it. It will be received with a
certain amount of favour of course, as a production of a rich man amusing himself with
literature as a sort of whim. But, as I told you before, genius seldom develops itself
under the influence of wealth. Then again ‘swagger’ folks can never get it out of their
fuddled heads that Literature belongs to Grub Street. Great poets, great philosophers,
great romancists are always vaguely alluded to by ‘swagger’ society as ‘those sort of
people.’ Those sort of people are so ‘interesting’ say the blue-blooded noodles
deprecatingly, excusing themselves as it were for knowing any members of the class
literary. You can fancy a ‘swagger’ lady of Elizabeth’s time asking a friend—‘O do you
mind, my dear, if I bring one Master William Shakespeare to see you? He writes plays,
and does something or other at the Globe theatre,—in fact I’m afraid he acts a little—
he’s not very well off poor man,—but these sort of people are always so amusing!’
Now you, my dear Tempest, are not a Shakespeare, but your millions will give you a
better chance than he ever had in his life-time, as you will not have to sue for
patronage, or practise a reverence for ‘my lord’ or ‘my lady,’—these exalted
personages will be only too delighted to borrow money of you if you will lend it.”
“I shall not lend,”—I said.
“Nor give?”
“Nor give.”
His keen eyes flashed approval.
“I am very glad,” he observed, “that you are determined not to ‘go about doing
good’ as the canting humbugs say, with your money. You are wise. Spend on yourself,
—because your very act of spending cannot but benefit others through various
channels. Now I pursue a different course. I always help charities, and put my name on
subscription-lists,—and I never fail to assist a certain portion of clergy.”
“I rather wonder at that—” I remarked—“Especially as you tell me you are not a
Christian.”
“Yes,—it does seem strange,—doesn’t it?”—he said with an extraordinary accent
of what might be termed apologetic derision—“But perhaps you don’t look at it in the
proper light. Many of the clergy are doing their utmost best to destroy religion,—by
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 38/257 cant, by hypocrisy, by sensuality, by shams of every description,—and when they seek
my help in this noble work, I give it,—freely!”
I laughed “You must have your joke evidently”—I said, throwing the end of my
finished cigar into the fire—“And I see you are fond of satirizing your own good
actions. Hullo, what’s this?”
For at that moment Amiel entered, bearing a telegram for me on a silver salver. I
opened it,—it was from my friend the publisher, and ran as follows—
“Accept book with pleasure. Send manuscript immediately.”
I showed this to Rimânez with a kind of triumph. He smiled.
“Of course! what else did you expect? Only the man should have worded his
telegram differently, for I do not suppose he would accept the book with pleasure if he
had to lay out his own cash upon it. ‘Accept money for publishing book with pleasure’
should have been the true message of the wire. Well, what are you going to do?”
“I shall see about this at once”—I answered, feeling a thrill of satisfaction that at
last the time of vengeance on certain of my enemies was approaching—“The book
must be hurried through the press as quickly as possible,—and I shall take a particular
pleasure in personally attending to all the details concerning it. For the rest of my
plans,—”
“Leave them to me!” said Rimânez laying his finely shaped white hand with a
masterful pressure on my shoulder; “Leave them to me!—and be sure that before very
long I shall have set you aloft like the bear who has successfully reached the bun on
the top of a greased pole,—a spectacle for the envy of men, and the wonder of angels!”
09.08.2026, 23:37 The Sorrows of Satan, by Marie Corelli—A Project Gutenberg eBook
https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/42332/pg42332-images.html 39/257 T